How organisations and individuals respond to ethical and moral issues when designing and developing digital systems. 

 

Learning objectives 

 

Guidelines from professional changes in the culture within an organization. 

Strategic planning and decisions. 

Content of internal policy documents. 

Company cultures. 

 

It is important to understand the role of professional organisations. Some of their functions include: 

Issuing a code of conduct to guide professional behaviour 

Promoting fairer access to the profession to people from all backgrounds 

Dealing with complaints against professionals and implementing disciplinary procedures 

Setting and assessing  professional examinations. 

Providing support for continuing professional development (CPD) 

 

 

Code of conducts 

 

Codes of conduct are a collection of written rules, principles and values, as well as employee expectations, behaviours and relationships, that organisations believe are important and significant to ensure the successful operation of the business. 

 

Strategic planning and decisions 

 

When setting an organisational strategy for the design and development of digital systems, it is important to include a strong sense of ethics , as well as considering the wellbeing of the current stakeholders and society at large. 

 

Strategic plan documents the mission 

 

A strategic plan documents the mission, vision and values of an organisation, as well as its long-term goals and how they are to be achieved. A carefully thought-out strategic plan can play a key role in supporting the growth of the business and its success. This is because it informs the organisation and its employees how best to respond to opportunities and challenges. It is important to include ethics in strategic planning to ensure that all areas of the organisation support its overall ethos and values. Therefore, when considering the organisation’s ethics, all stakeholders should be taken into account, and the key ethical considerations included in any strategic plan:  

stakeholder participation  

organisational values  

individual values  

managing change 

 

Change in strategy has an impact on organisational structure 

 

Managing change due to a change in strategy has an impact on organisational structure. This change can be managed in different ways. It is important that any change is managed in a way that supports organisational and personal values. It is also important to consider 

Who will gain from the change? u Who will not gain from the change? u Is the change worth the risk? u How will the organisation work with those affected by the change in order to help them make the transition? u How will the organisation work with those who cannot make the transition 

 

Stake holder 

 

Anyone with an interest in a business or organisation. Stakeholders can be individuals, groups or other organisations, or businesses that are affected by the organisation’s activity. They can include customers, suppliers, employees, communities, government and even the ecosystem. 

 

Companies culture and how it is established communicated and sustained 

 

A company’s culture is the shared values, beliefs and expectations that assist in guiding, motivating and informing the actions of its workforce. Successful companies tend to be ones that have a strong company culture. This helps the workforce to interpret and understand the company and its goals, which in turn encourages active participation, a sense of community, teamwork and positive performance. This can improve the way that people interact with each other and the mutual respect that is demonstrated across the business, as well as helping employees to carry out their tasks efficiently and effectively.  

 

Positive company culture 

 

The key factors in fostering a positive company culture are: 

Clear, inclusive and engaging explanations of the company’s culture and its goals 

Mutual respect between the management team and the rest of the workforce 

Continuous communication between management and the workforce 

Transparency and prompt communication of potential changes 

Development of workforce participation by encouraging them to put forward ideas, suggestions and even concerns 

Provision of resources that will support the health and well-being of the workforce. 

 

 

Whistleblower 

 

Many organisations have whistleblowing policies. A whistleblower is a worker who reports certain types of wrongdoing. The wrongdoing must be in the public interest. This means that it must have an impact on other people. A whistleblower is protected by law and must not be treated unfairly or lose their job due to reporting a wrongdoing. 

 

What the law says about whistleblowing 

 

If you disclose information about wrongdoing, the law protects you from being treated unfairly or losing your job. A disclosure qualifies for protection if you are a worker and you disclose something about an organisation. A disclosure must be about something that affects the general public. 

 

Types of whistleblowing complaints 

 

Whistleblowing complaints include: 

A criminal offence such as fraud 

Danger to the health and safety of a person or group of people 

Risk of or physical damage to the environment 

The organisation is breaking the law, for example  

Does not have appropriate insurances in place such  

A public liability insurance 

Someone is covering up (hiding) a wrongdoing 

There has been a miscarriage of justice. 

 

Complaints not included 

 

Whistleblowing complaints do not include personal grievances unless it is in the public interest. Personal grievances include: 

Bullying  

Discrimination  

Harassment 

 

 
