How organisations and individuals respond to ethical and moral issues when designing and developing digital systems. 

 

Learning Outcoimes: 

Guidelines from professional changes in the culture within an organisation 

Strategic planning and decisions 

Content of internal polciy documents 

 

  

Use of guidelines from poressional organisations: 

It is important to understand the role of professional organisations. SOme of their fucntions include: 

Issuing a code of conduct to guide professional behaviour 

Promoting fairer access to the profession to people from all backgrounsds 

Dealing with complaints against professionals and implementing disciplinary procedures 

Setting and assessing professional examinations 

Providing support for conitnuing professional develiopment (CPD) 

Publishing professional journals or agazines providing networks for professionals to meet and discuss their field of expertise representing their members in lobbying 

Government about relevant legislation providing careers support and opportunities for students, graduates and people already working in the profession 

 

Codes of conducts: 

Codes of conduct are a collection of written rules, principles and values, as well as employee expectations, ehaviours and relationships, that organisations believe are important and isgnificant to ensure the successful operation of the buinsess  

A wiritten code of conduct provides guidance for employees, customers and other relevant stakeholders. It confirms what is most important, valued and desirable with respect to relationships, interats and the organisations global perspective 

 

Strategic planning and decisions: 

When setting an organisational strategy for the design and development of digital systems, it is important to include a strong sense of ethics, as well as considering the well-being of the current stakeholders and society at large. THis is an integral part f the strategic planning process and is often referred to as Stakeholder Theory. Organisations who usually appoint  a board of directors who oversee the strategy to ensure that it remains aligned with the organisations ethics and values 

 

The theory behind social norms stategies: 

When strategically planning and making decisions for digitally transforming an organisation, it is I is a long-term plan which focuses on: 

The implemtation of new technologies 

INtegrated digital media channels 

Smart ways of working in a digital environment using the available technology 

 

Strtegic plan documents the mission: 

A strategic plan documents the mission, vision and values of an organisation, as well as its long-term goals and how they are to be achieved. A carefully thought out strategic plan can play a key role in supporting the growth of the bsuiness and its success. This is because it informs the organisation and its employees how best to respond to opportunities and challenges. It is important to include ethics in strategic planning toe nsure that all areas of the organisation support its overall ethos and values. Therefore, when considering the organisations ethics, all stakeholders should be taken into account, and the key ethical considerations included I any strategic plan: 

Stakeholder participation 

ORganisational values 

INdividual values 

Managing change 

 

Change in strategy has an impat on organisational structure: 

Managing change due to a change in strategy has an impact in organisational strucutre. This change can be managed in differnet ways. It is important that any change is managed in a way that supports organisational andp ersonal values. It is also important to consider: 

Who will gain from the change? WHo will not gain from the change: Is the change worth the risk?@ How will the organisation work with those affected by the change in order to hel them make the transition? How will the organisation work with those who cannot make the transition 

 

Stakeholder: 

Anyoen with an interest in a business or otganisation. Stakeholders can be individuals, groups or other organisations, or businesses that are affected by the organisations actiivty. They can include customers, suppliers, employees, communities, government and even the ecosystem. 

 

The content of internal policy documents: 

Internal policies communicate the organisations values and its expectations with respect to the behaviours and the performance of its employees. They are often called workplace policies and define what is acceptable and unacceptable beyhaviour in the workplace. They also include the implications if the policies are not adhered 

 

Examples of internal policies include: 

Annuyal leave and sickenss 

IT security and data protection 

Maternity, paternity and parental leave 

Smoking 

Dress code 

Whistleblowing 

Bullying and harassment 

Health and safety  

Social media 

Acceptable use 

Diversity and inclusion 

 

 

 

 

Substance Abuse Policies: 

You can not take illicit substances in the workplace. They can affect attendance and productivity, and depending on the workplace, pose a safety hazard. Such action taken can include termination for doing heroin in the toilet, or some sort of employee asssistance program to help them overcome their issue. 

 

Dress code: Some companies require professional dress, such as a McDonalds uniform. This is to differentiate the workers from members of the public, and to help foster community and a brand. 

 

Acceptable Use Policy: This is a policy for the use of computers in the workplace. This is to ensure that the digital safety of both employees and the company is kept. Examples of what could be in an AUP include – no giving out your password, password must be a certain length, no use of social media. 

 

Company dependent policies: Some policies may be inserted as issues arise in such a fluid environment. This is to ensure coherence as to what is and isnt allowed if there is a point of alarm. Such examples include: 

Drug testing 

Family leave 

Attendence 

Toilet use 

Relationships between employees 

Breastfeeding 

 

Equality: Under the Equality Act of 2010, companies are required to curb discrimination under the protected charactersistics of: Sex, gender reassignment, sexuality, religion, age, marriage, pregnancy and maternity, and race. 

 

 

 

 

Positive COmpany CUlture: 

The key factors in fostering ap ositive company culture are: 

Clear, inclusive and engaging explanations of the comapnys culture and its goals 

Mutual respect between the managemment team and the rest of the workforce 

COntinuous communication between management and the workforce 

Transparency and prompt ocmmunication of pote ntial changes 

Development of workforce participation by encouraging them to put forward ideas, suggestiions and even concerns 

Provision of resources that will support the health and wellbeing of the workforce 

 

 

Whistleblowing: 

Many organisations have whistleblowing policies. A whistleblower is a worker who reports certain types of wrongdoing. THe wrongdoing must be in the public interest. THis means that it must have an impact on other peoople. A whistleblower isp rotected by law and must not be treated unfairly orr lose their job due to reporting a wrongdoing 

 

What the law says about whistleblowing? 

If you disclose information aobut wrongdoing, the law protects you from being treated unfairly or losing your job. A disclosure qualifies for protection if oyu are a worker and you disclose something about an organisation. A disclosure must be  

 

Types of whistleblowing complaints: 

Whistleblowing ocmplaints include: 

A criminal offence such as fraud 

Danger to the health and safety of a person or group of people 

Risk of or physical dmaage to the environment 

THe organisation is brekaing the law for example 

Does not have appropriate insurances in place such 

A public liability insurance 

SOmeone is covering up a wrongdoing 

There has been a miscarriage of justice 

 

 

Four ethical considerations when developing a strategic plan: 

Stakeholder participation 

Organisational values 

Individual values  

Managing change 

 

Four whistleblwoing complaints: 

Helath and safety 

Coverups 

Lawbreaking 

Fraud 

 

A strong positive culture leads to higher productivity, stemming from higher employee morale, a more inclusive vision and a workforce that bettter understands what the company is doing. 

 

Employers can create positivity in the workplace through transparency, development of workforce participation, teambuilding exercises, and mutual respect. 

 

Recap: 

Guidelines from professional changes in the culture within an organisation 

Strategic planning and decisions 

COntent of internal policy documents 

Company culture 
