Strategic Plan Documents the Mission 

A strategic plan documents the mission, vision and values of an organisation, as well as its long term goals and how they are to be achieved. A carefully thought out strategic plan can play a key role in supporting the growth of the business and its success. This is because it informs the organisation and its employees how best to respond to opportunities and challenges. It is important to include ethics in strategic planning to ensure that all areas of the organisation support its overall ethos and values.  

 

Change in strategy has an impact on organisational structure 

Managing change due to a change in strategy has an impact on organisational structure. This change can be managed in different ways. It is important that any change is managed in a way that supports organisational and personal values. It is also important to consider. 

Who will gain from the change? Who will not gain from the change? Is the change worth the risk? How will the organisation work with those affected by the change in order to help them make the transition? How will the organisation work with those who cannot make the transition? 

 Stakeholder  

Anyone with an interest in a business or organisation. Stakeholders can be individuals, groups or other organisations, or businesses that are affected by the organisation's activity. They can include customers, suppliers, employees, communities, government and even the ecosystem 

 

The content of internal policy documents 

Internal policies communicate the organisation's values and its expectations with respect to the behaviours and the performance of its employees. 

 

Examples of internal policies: 

Annual leave and sickness 

IT security and data protection 

Maternity, paternity and parental leave  

Smoking 

Dress code 

Whistleblowing 

Bullying and harassment  

Health and safety 

Social media 

Acceptable use 

Diversity and inclusion 
The purpose of internal policy documents is to protect not only yourself but others and the company. They are rules which everyone must abide to. If anyone breaks the agreement and doesn't coincide with the rules agreed upon there are consequences: dismissal, fired or suspension. This is because each rule has a purpose, some are there are to stop yourself or others getting hurt physically or emotionally; while others are in place in order to keep a good brand image and keep the company's stability. At Newcastle College there are also rules that persuade its pupils to become the best they can. Enforcing policies that make students aim to improve on their attitudes, behaviours, punctuality and attendance.  

 

Company culture and how this is established, communicated and sustained  

A company's culture is the shared values, beliefs and expectations that assist in the guiding, motivating and informing the action of its workforce. Successful companies tend to be ones that have a strong company culture. This helps the workforce to interpret and understand the company and its goals, which in turn encourages active participation.  

 

Positive company culture  
The key factors in fostering a positive company culture are: 

Clear, inclusive and engaging explanations of the company's culture and its goals  

Mutual respect between the management team and the rest of the workforce 

Continuous communication between management and the workforce 

Tranparency and prompt communication of potential changes 

Development of workforce participation by encouraging them to put forward ideas, suggestions. 

 

Whistleblowing 

Many organisations have whistleblowing policies. A whistleblower is a worker who reports certain types of wrongdoing. The wrongdoing must be in the public interest. This means that it must have an impact on other people. A whistleblower is protected by law and must not be treated unfairly or lose their job due to reporting a wrongdoing. 

 

Types of whistleblowing complaints: 

A criminal offence such as fraud 

Danger to the health and safety of a person or group of people 

Risk of or physical damage to the environment 

The organisation is breaking the law, for example 
Does not have appropriate insurances in place such  

A public liability insurance 

Someone is covering up (hiding) a wrongdoing 

There has been a miscarriage of justice 

 

Complaints not included: 

No personal grievances, unless in public interest 

Bullying 

Discrimination 

Harassment 

 

Four ethical considerations: 

Will others keep their job? 

How will others feel about the change? 

Does it obey the law? 

Does it encourage our employees? 

 

Code of conduct is a set of regulations and rules in place to protect employees and organisations. If anyone breaks the agreement and doesn't coincide with the rules agreed upon there are consequences: dismissal, fired or suspension. This is because each rule has a purpose, some are there are to stop yourself or others getting hurt physically or emotionally; while others are in place in order to keep a good brand image and keep the company's stability. 

 Four whistleblowing complaints: 

Fraud 

Danger to health and safety 

Risk of damage to the work environment 

The organisation is breaking the law 

 

If an organisations has a strong, positive culture then it will cause a smooth running workplace. Everyone will be able to comfortably work together with no issues allowing for better quality work to be completed, in shorter time. This can be created through being nice to each other and steering away from negativity and unkind remarks. 
